Source: https://techlibrary.doodlelabs.com/quick-start-guide-ch6

Quick-Start
Mesh Rider Quick Start Guide
Chapter 1:  What's in the Box?
Chapter 2: Getting Started on the Bench
Chapter 3: Basic Radio Configuration
Chapter 4: Bench Testing
Chapter 5: Advanced Radio Configuration
Chapter 6: Basic Field Testing
Chapter 7: Troubleshooting
GUI Quick Walkthrough Guide (Video)
Throughput Estimation Tool
Optimizing the RF Link
Supported Networking Modes
Recommended Antenna Matrix
Chapter 6: Basic Field Testing
Webpage to PDF
Field Testing Guide for Doodle Labs Mesh Rider Radios
Purpose
: To assess radio performance in real-world conditions, measuring range, throughput, latency, and link stability.
Setup Requirements
Hardware
:
Mesh Rider radios in a protective, field-friendly housing (preferably metal for heat dissipation)
Tablets (Android or Windows) for mobility or laptops for data handling
Antennas appropriate for operational frequency (
Doodle Labs Recommended Antenna Matrix
​)
Battery Packs or reliably power source for radios & computers
Software
:
SSH client for radio management
iperf3
for throughput testing
ping
for latency measurement
Network Configuration
Set up a simple point-to-point or mesh network depending on your needs:
Point-to-Point
: Use a Wearable radio and a mini-OEM radio connected via Wi-Fi or USB.
Mesh
: Configure multiple nodes using
batctl o
to view routing information and node connectivity.
Testing
Throughput Testing
:
Run
iperf3 -c <server IP> -t 30 -i 1
to test TCP throughput.
Use UDP mode with
-u -b 5M
to simulate stable data flow and measure packet loss.
Latency Testing
:
Perform latency checks with
ping <IP address> -i 0.2 -s 250 -Q 0xC0
for high-priority packets.
Record round-trip times, noting any high-latency intervals that may indicate interference or distance limits.
Range Testing
:
Initial Setup:
Place the two radios (e.g., Wearable and Mini-OEM) at a starting position approximately 5 meters apart in an open, line-of-sight area.
Establish Baseline Connectivity:
Start with a basic connectivity check using
ping
to ensure both radios are communicating.
Run a quick throughput test using
iperf3
to establish baseline performance metrics at close range.
Incremental Distance Testing:
Gradually increase the distance between the two radios in increments of 10 meters.
At each distance, run a
5-minute
iperf3
test
and record metrics such as throughput, packet loss, and latency.
Monitor Signal and Connection Quality:
After each distance increment, check signal quality using
iw dev wlan${PHY} station dump
Record RSSI (signal strength), link quality, and any packet loss observed.
Identify Maximum Range:
Continue increasing the distance until you notice significant packet loss, increased latency, or a drop in throughput below acceptable levels for your application.
Recommended End Point:
The maximum effective range is reached when throughput drops below 1 Mbps or packet loss consistently exceeds 10%.
Record Environmental Factors:
Place the two radios (e.g., Wearable and Mini-OEM) at a starting position approximately 5 meters apart in an open, line-of-sight area.
Note any environmental elements that may impact the results, such as terrain, weather conditions, or obstructions.
Environmental Considerations
Antenna Positioning
: Ensure antennas are mounted with adequate spacing to avoid mutual interference.
Interference
: Avoid high-density areas with significant Wi-Fi or RF noise, as this may affect link stability and throughput.
Fresnel Zone
: Ensure partial line-of-sight clearance to avoid link degradation due to reflections or blockages.
Performance Monitoring
Signal Quality
: Run
iw wlan${PHY} station dump
to measure RSSI and other signal metrics.
Route Stability
: Use
batctl o
to monitor mesh routes and detect changes due to movement or signal fluctuations.
Airtime Utilization
: Monitor
sysutils activity
to understand how much of the available spectrum is being used.
Optimization Tips
Channel Bandwidth
: Use the widest bandwidth that doesn’t exceed the environment’s noise floor for maximum throughput.
Modulation
: The radio may auto-adjust modulation rates; maintain stable antennas and orientation for consistent rates.
Environmental Tests
: Check performance over reflective surfaces (e.g., water) to understand potential multipath effects.
Table of Contents